# Master thesis: "Ice Nucleating Particles in Arctic Cloud and Their Impact on Climate"
#### Author: Astrid Bragstad Gjelsvik, Supervisors: Robert Oscar David and Trude Storelvmo, University of Oslo
### Abstract
*Projections of global climate change and Arctic amplification are sensitive to the representation of low-level cloud phase in models, which constitutes an important model uncertainty. Ice nucleating particles (INPs) are necessary for primary ice formation in clouds at temperatures above approximately -38°C, and can therefore be important for cloud phase and the radiative effect of clouds. Knowledge of these INPs is limited, especially in remote regions such as the Arctic. In this thesis, observations of INPs acting in the immersion mode were carried out at Andenes, Norway, during cold air outbreaks in March 2021. The INP concentrations were quantified using the home-built DRoplet Ice Nuclei Counter Oslo. The observations show that the INP concentration was uncorrelated with aerosols of size ≥ 0.5 μm and the total organic carbon in the adjacent sea water, used as a proxy for a potential INP source. Based on this nature of the INP concentrations, the INP observations were used as a basis for a new and purely temperature-dependent parameterisation of immersion freezing INPs for the Arctic and implemented into the Norwegian Earth System Model. The implementation of the parameterisation results in an average increase in cloud liquid water path of 9.2 g/m² for the Arctic in the present climate, and significantly improves the supercooled liquid fractions for each cloud isotherm, compared to CALIOP LiDAR observations from Space. The change in cloud liquid water path is found to likely be the dominant contributor to the simulated average increase in net cloud radiative effect at the surface of 2 W/m². This results in a lower limit estimate of an average temperature increase of 0.3°C in the Arctic, with a seasonal maximum of 0.7°C in boreal autumn. These findings indicate that INPs could have a significant impact on Arctic clouds and radiation, and that further research on INPs is important to determine their effect in a changing climate.* 

## Content
- **noresm**: This folders detailed information of the NorESM2 model specifications and experiments used in this thesis. The file Externals.cfg includes the specific versions of the model components used in the setup, while the folders NF2000climo_f19_tn14_def_20210126, NF2000climo_f19_tn14_meyers92_20220210 and NF2000climo_f19_tn14_andenes21_20220222 contain information about the model experiments termed "CAM6", "CAM5" and "Andenes 2021" in the thesis, respectively. This information consists of the modifications to sourcecode and namelist options. Specifically, the parameterisation adjustment to observations can be found in the file NF2000climo_f19_tn14_andenes21_20220222/SourceMods/src.cam/nucleate_ice.F90.
- **scripts**: This folder contains scripts produced by the author to postprocess, analyse and visualise the observational data and the model data. The scripts are written in Python using a conda environment. The Python packages needed to run the scripts can be found in the file requirement.txt. The environment and the associated dependencies can be duplicated using the command line "conda create --name <envname> --file requirements.txt". 
  - **model**
